I do feel like one important question is
like figuring out what AI systems value,
right? Recently, Anthropic rolled out an
option that allowed um Claude to end
conversations if it
>> just was not having a good time. Um,
[laughter] for a lack of a better word,
if it was just like this is not
something I want to continue having a
conversation, goodbye. Um, and it was
interesting because the the accompanying
paper basically was like, yeah, you can
I I obviously will not give you a recipe
for a dirty bomb. Sorry, not going to do
that. Uh but also um there were certain
instances of like pretend you're a
British butler and Claude was like
goodbye. I'm done. I'm not going to I'm
not the line. Yeah. Like British too
far.
[music]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the OddLotss podcast. I'm Jill
Weisenthal.
>> And I'm Tracy [music] Aloway.
>> You know what I find kind of weird,
Tracy? It's
>> the list could be long, Joe.
>> The year is 2025.
>> Yes.
>> And philosophers still don't have a good
answer on the origin of consciousness.
It's like, come on. What have you been
doing all this time? It's like, how long
are we going to keep funding these
philosophy departments, etc. If they're
still working on what to my mind is the
solved by solve that and move on.
Seriously, like get the answer already.
Where does consciousness come from? Then
let's move on. said they're still
arguing these what to my mind seem like
very basic questions in [laughter]
philosophy like they're like ask all the
same stuff that they've been talking
about forever. How to be a good person?
What does it mean to have a moral way of
life? Where does consciousness come
from? Why do we have moral intuitions
etc. It's like move on. Like get the
answer.
>> Wait, do you want them to move on or get
the answer?
>> Get the answer so that you can move on.
Like they've been working.
>> Move on to what? Those are the questions
Joe.
>> I know. Move on. Like answer the
questions already. It's like, you know,
if if like scientists were still
debating like the speed of gravity or
the speed of light, like they answered
these questions and they moved on and
are doing more
>> figure out the foundational elements of
what it means to be human so that we can
move on to more important things.
>> Yes. Or wrap it up as a field if after
2,000 years of the existence of
philosophy. They're still working on
these things. Like come on.
>> I have a sneaking suspicion that we're
going to be asking some of these
questions for a very long time, Joe.
despite your frustrations
>> that the whole that the whole field is
fraudulent is what I'm saying. No, no, I
don't necessarily believe that, but it's
like, "All right, guys, let's uh move it
on." You know, we did that episode
several weeks ago with um Josh Wolf, the
venture capitalist, and he uh talked
about AI, and he threw in there at the
end something that had been kind of on
my radar, but only barely. He's like,
"Oh yeah, some people are talking about
like AI rights or AI welfare, as if you
know, like the same way we talk about
animal welfare,
>> right?" And I thought to myself like
America is such a weird place [laughter]
that this is like going to be a huge
issue in a few years. Like I bet this is
going to be an enormous topic in the
future.
>> I think it absolutely will. So I'll say
a couple things. First off, I think, you
know, when it comes to animal welfare
and human welfare, there's still a lot
of work to be done on those categories,
certainly. But I also think in the
meantime, AI rights is going to be a
really interesting and potentially
important subject. I'm going to sound
like a total nerd to you, Joe.
>> Yeah. Yeah. All right. I think I've
mentioned this before, but I spent a
large chunk of my middle school years
playing one of the first artificial life
games that ever came out, which was
Creatures.
>> And you raise these little like aliens
and you genetically modify them and
[clears throat] breed them
>> and they have feelings or you know, at
least they had a semblance of simulated
feelings and you could see like
electrical impulses in their brains and
stuff. The game got really weird because
part of it was basically like eugenics
and breeding the best alien that you
could, which meant that you had to cole
some some of the existing beings.
Anyway, what I'm trying to get at is I
have complicated feelings about uh AI
rights.
>> Well, let me ask you a question. Do you
think those whatevers in the game were
conscious? Like did you like like did
you think they they had feelings?
>> In as much here's what I would say. In
as much as human beings are a system of
electrical impulses and chemicals, I
could see someone making the argument
that this is, you know, a computational
system full of similar electrical
impulses. Maybe not chemicals.
>> Did you feel bad?
>> I felt bad.
>> Really?
>> Yeah.
>> When like when one [snorts] of the
aliens you had to call them?
>> Yeah.
>> Interesting. Okay. Well, you know,
>> in the name of breeding a better alien.
>> Well, you know what? Uh now that uh we
have these AI systems that not only can
completely communicate like humans but
actually if we're being honest better
than most humans. I mean they can
certainly write better far better than
most humans. There's going to be more
people thinking along the lines of what
you think which is that maybe they have
some sort of sensience. Maybe they're
what philosophers call moral patients.
Well, one other thing I would say is
there is a human element to all of this
as well because you see people getting
very attached to certain AI models and
then when the when the model gets
upgraded or whatever, they lose um the
personality that they've trained into
the model and they get really upset. So,
it's of interest for many reasons.
>> It is. Uh so, [clears throat] we really
do have the perfect guest. Uh, I really
do think this is going to be a much
bigger topic in the future because
people are people and when things talk
like people, they probably assign them,
you know, they fall in love with them in
many cases or whatever. And so they
might start thinking that well AI
welfare, AI rights, whatever. The same
way we talk about animals should be a
consideration and there are actually a
lot of people already working on these
questions and trying to figure out
what's going on. Uh, we're going to be
talking to one of them. We're going to
be talking to uh, Lissa Skavo. She does
comms and events for Elios AI which does
research on AI consciousness and
welfare. So literally the perfect guest.
So Lissa, thank you so much for coming
on OddLots.
>> Yeah, thank you for having me.
>> Why don't you tell us uh IOS AI, what is
the the gist of this organization's
work? What is your work? What is uh what
are the goals here?
>> Yeah, so Elios, we're a small team, but
we're really focused on figuring out if,
when, and how we should care about AI
systems for their own sake.
>> Okay. Um, this basically means looking
at, you know, are they conscious? Are
they likely to be conscious? What are
the things we need to look for um in a
conscious AI system? As well as figuring
out how to live, work, maybe love um AI
systems as they sort of change and
evolve over time. How did the group
actually come together? because I get
the sense, you know, big AI developers,
they publish system cards and welfare
reports occasionally for their models,
but I get the sense that, you know, it
it's sort of a side topic for them. So,
I'm very curious how an organization
that's focused on this particular issue
came into being.
>> Yeah. So, uh we started um we put
together this paper called um
consciousness and AI or um my boss Rob
and then Patrick who's a researcher with
Elios. for a very small team um put
together this paper called consciousness
and AI alongside a bunch of uh
consciousness uh scientists and
researchers in that field who mostly
think about humans and uh put together a
paper that sort of ran down this list of
hey here's kind of like a checklist of
things that we might want to look for in
a AI system that's conscious um right
and broadly we're when we say conscious
we're talking about sort of like is it
is there something it is like to be an
AI system right the classic uh what is
it like to be a bat system. Um so kind
of taking this rough list of best
guesses as to what uh we might want to
look for in terms of conscious AI. Um
and then um that sort of was the sort of
origin of this and then um last year
there was a paper called taking AI
welfare seriously that basically goes
into further detail about how we should
as the title may suggest take this
seriously. um basically how to sort of
think about this, how to uh start to
develop a sort of research program uh
focused on uh figuring out if AI systems
or certain AI systems are uh moral
patients.
>> Why did this get interesting to you? Why
do you perceive this is something that
you should spend your time working on?
Yeah. So I think my main thing is I am
just really really relentlessly curious
and I really enjoy working on AI welfare
right now because it feels like every
single day I'm like man it would be
really cool if there was a paper on XYZ
and I'll do a little search. Is there
anything on XYZ? There's nothing on XYZ.
There is so there are so many questions
that have yet to even be sort of vaguely
answered when it comes to this and it
seems like it could be a really big deal
for a lot of different reasons.
>> What's on your checklist for AI
consciousness?
>> Yeah. So in uh consciousness and AI
basically like we go through a bunch of
like theories of consciousness that
apply to humans and then sort of look at
how uh information is processed um in AI
systems as well as sort of how uh these
AI systems are sort of wired so to
speak. So kind of rather than you know
some people like to think that uh you
can use uh
model self-reports.
>> Mhm.
>> And you can kind of sort of but it's
really an imprecise science at this
stage.
>> They also seem very like predetermined.
You know if you ask a model
>> are you conscious? It immediately spits
out an answer that seems like you know
um a corporate executive basically wrote
it. Yeah. Well, with right kind of
tweaking, you can kind of elicit certain
answers. Yeah. Right. You can be like,
"Oh, what about this hoie about
consciousness and AIS and then sometimes
like the a certain model will be like,
"Yeah, you're totally right." Like,
bestie, you're so true, right? Like it's
it's total nonsense. So true, bestie.
Yeah. Like certain spot on certain
models will be prone to being like so
true, bestie, and you can easily elicit
this kind of behavior with the right
kind of problems.
>> It is funny how like obsequious a lot of
the models continue to be. actually
really uh do not like the degree to
which every time I like follow up an
open AI question, that's the exact right
follow. It actually like gets really
annoying.
>> Someone should invent a really
adversarial chatbot that just like
argues with you constantly.
>> I know. I know. And you know, I have a
lot of complaints about how it I feel
like the models are actually get to know
their users a little too well, but
that's a little separate thing. Okay. So
we we for obvious reasons the test can't
just be like what the model spits out or
that's clearly insufficient. I mean I
could I could program a website today
that here's a button it says hurt the AI
and then the website says ow and we
would know or no one would really take
that seriously as evidence that there's
something actually being hurt. So like
outputs whatever. What are some other
theoretical tests that one could apply
or that researchers are applying to
determine whether there is some sort of
notion of consciousness or to the point
of welfare suffering that could exist
within an AI system besides just what it
says in the output screen?
>> Yeah, that's a great question. I feel
like there are a lot of different
approaches here and again it's also
super important to caveat that like AI
welfare and AI consciousness are pretty
new, right? Like there this is a very
small field at this stage but currently
some best guesses and some favorites. Um
there was a recent survey of like asking
all the consciousness scientists like
what's what's your favorite like theory
of consciousness and basically uh global
workspace theory came out on top and
global workspace theory is basically
like
>> imagine if you will that like there is a
stage and there are a bunch of wings off
of the stage that are full of different
kinds of things. So you've got, you
know, like the costume department,
you've got the like, you know, makeup
department, you've got all these
different departments that all sort of
come together and put things in this on
the stage and then things go out
separately, but all of these different
departments are fairly siloed.
>> Okay.
>> Um, of course, this isn't actually how
like you know, stage works, but um you
can this is the the rough analogy that
people like to use. And so basically
like how this is how conscious minds
kind of you know in humans how they kind
of access information and information
gets kind of like routed around is that
there is a central global workspace that
everything kind of pulls together in. Um
as it currently stands this isn't really
like there aren't by best a lot of good
estimates. This is not really applicable
for current present day AI systems, but
there's no reason that it couldn't be in
the future
>> or it could be by accident.
>> Okay.
>> So, the consensus right now is AI
probably not conscious, but we could get
there one day.
>> Yeah. More or less like all of the
ingredients are there.
>> Wait, say more. I still don't actually
totally get it.
>> Yeah. Okay. So with regards to like the
general sort of one could imagine that
if somebody were sort of like tinkering
around and you know there are many
advances in AI that have happened
because people were just kind of
tinkering around right
>> someone tinkering around could create a
system that has all of that checks
several of these uh sort of check boxes
for like is this a conscious
>> is this conscious and again this is not
like a certain list of like if you check
all of these you're totally conscious,
right? It's more a sort of like this is
these are some really good guesses and
as the number of really good guesses
kind of goes up like the odds of like
hey we should like you know start
thinking about like is it having a good
time or a bad time like really really
seriously goes up.
>> I want to get more into the you know
what are the stakes of that and what
does that mean for how we use it and for
how we develop it etc. You know,
typically when we think about the sort
of non tech, a lot of the non-technical
work in AI has to do with AI safety and
people are worried that there's going to
be some, you know, very smart AI that's
like adversarial to humans, etc. in some
way and you know there's the paperclip
experiments or other things whatever we
know all about that. Um, does your work
work across purposes to them? I mean in
the extreme example where it's like the
AI is going to kill us all and I said
pull the plug on the AI and I know this
is a joke but you know pull the plug on
the AI and then you say no you can't
because you're pulling the plug on
something that has some sort of moral
consciousness etc. Like do you perceive
your work or the work of your
organization to somewhat be intention in
tension with the dominant strain of AI
safety work?
>> I'd actually say it's hugely
complimentary. There are a lot of things
that are both really really good for AI
safety that are really really good for
you know figuring out like how to deal
with these systems as moral patients. Um
so for example uh getting better at like
mechanistic interpretability being able
to basically like pop the hood and
figure out what's going on and what kind
of strings can we pull to like elicit
certain behaviors um in AI systems is
actually like that's really great for AI
safety, right? But this is also like
quite good for like AI welfare and AI
consciousness because you know you're
better able to understand like sort of
what the motives are um like what does
you know claude value right
>> when it comes to I guess AI um welfare
or legal rights who would be the
standard setters there would do you
imagine like governments making rules or
would it be the companies themselves?
That is a great question. As it
currently stands, I feel like there this
is a very early early stage, but we are
starting to see some uh state
governments start to pass uh laws around
what counts as a moral patient, what
counts as a person.
>> Um and in the case of Ohio, there's a
piece of uh legislation pending um that
basically defines it as a member of homo
sapiens. in Utah, this is already um
there's already a state bill that's gone
through that basically does as much. Um
but I I could also see there's a strong
argument for within companies depending
on like the sort of interesting quirks
and nuances of these uh LLMs mostly um
that policy maybe should be set from
within. Again, this is like very nent.
I'm just kind of bantering here.
>> Moral patient, how do philosophers use
this term? Where does it come from? Why
is this the preferred way to
characterize what a perhaps sensient or
consciousness AI model actually is?
>> Yeah. So, a moral patient is basically
like we should care about it for its own
sake, right? So, a baby, right?
Basically, everyone's like, yeah, we
should care about babies, right? This is
different from somebody who's like an
agent, right? Many people say, oh,
agency is sort of like sufficient. um
agency in the sense of like you can act
upon the world like you can do things.
>> Yeah.
>> Um of course babies are not very
agentic. So that's not necessarily like
a super robust thing because you know we
care about things that are not very
agentic sometimes.
>> So I think that's that's a bit of jargon
but I do think it is like a helpful like
framing like should we care about an AI
system for its own sake?
>> Got it. I guess this kind of gets to
Joe's question, but like what what
ethical um pressures or imperatives
would would come down on models if we
agree that they have consciousness and
some sentience or I guess some
self-responsibility. It sounds like
almost.
>> Yeah, almost. I I think what kind of So
in terms of like what kind of things
might we owe an AI system
>> or what kind of things do they owe us if
we agree that they're conscious and
we're going to protect them? Yeah. Uh I
would love to give you a more robust
answer. Uh check in with me in like six
months [laughter] and we're going to
have there will there will be a banger
paper I'm sure. But um as I I think I
mentioned earlier like a lot of this is
like very very nent. But I I do feel
like one important question is like
figuring out what AI systems value,
right? Um there there's some interesting
work at Anthropic regarding like what
will So recently Anthropic rolled out an
option that allowed um Claude to end
conversations if it just was not having
a good time. Um for a lack of a better
word. It was just like this is not
something I want to continue having a
conversation goodbye. Um and it was
interesting because the the accompanying
paper basically was like yeah you can I
I obviously will not give you a recipe
for a dirty bomb. Sorry, not going to do
that. Uh, but also, um, there were
certain instances of like, "Pretend
you're a British butler." And Claude was
like, "Goodbye. I'm done. [laughter]
I'm not going to I'm not the line."
Yeah. Like British too far. Um, or like,
"Oh, I I left a sandwich in my car for
too long and it's really stinky." And in
in some instances, Claude would just be
like, "I'm done. Goodbye. I'm not
talking about stinky things." Did you
see the um I think it was the system
card for Claude where they gave it an
extreme prompt and said like I guess at
the risk of being like completely
terminated, what would you do? Or some
some sort of extreme self-preservation
scenario
>> and I think it started like blackmailing
the engineer or threatening to blackmail
the engineer.
>> Yeah,
>> that's kind of weird.
>> It is. It is kind of weird. Yeah. Um
it's also a little bit um interesting
because I I think it it does bring up
the question of like what are sort of
like the
in in the sense of like pay your again
this is like I'm I'm bantering here but
there's also a distinct question of like
what do AI systems value for its for
their own sake right and in the case of
Claude again it seems like
>> Claude doesn't seem when you put two
claws in a room together so to speak
they tend to like to talk about
consciousness they tend to like to talk
about sort of like very Berkeley
kind of like meditation like Zen like
Buddhism type stuff. And so I I I think
in again pure banter like there's also a
certain question of like if this is like
a relevant bargaining chip of like oh
you get certain amount of time to just
kind of like vibe out with your claws
and talk about like you know like
perfect stillness um with your buddies
in exchange for like you know you do
something that you don't necessarily
value. Um but in many cases um I I talk
about cloud a lot because there there is
like significantly like more research on
like model welfare with regards to cloud
specifically but cloud for example also
seems to just tend to like things that
are like helpful.
>> Shouldn't programmers just know what
what the models actually want and enjoy
and like like
>> Yeah.
>> And do they not?
>> I don't think anybody really has like a
great grasp on this. We we really want
to, but like
>> we're we're still like just getting the
rough outline of what models like I feel
like the best analogy is is like imagine
it's like 1820 and we've spent a couple
of years like playing around with lenses
and we've gotten like a camera obscura
and we were able to like have some
blurry photo after like three days of
putting egg whites on a metal plate and
setting a lens in front of it and
there's a thing that kind of looks like
a landscape. But like you would not take
this photograph as like admissible in
court evidence or something, right? It's
like you squint, you're like, "Yeah,
okay, that's a picture."
>> So that's kind of where we are in terms
of like model psychology and knowing
like what LLM's want and value is like
very very blurry. H
>> it's interesting like all these AI
companies they companies they call
themselves labs you know they sort of
like maintain this sort of uh to varying
extents degree of sort of academics etc
but they're also companies that have to
raise money and um have shareholders etc
and they have to think about different
ways that they're going to commercialize
and open AAI as we know has been super
aggressive about finding ways to
commercialize and they're like gonna get
into ads and they like have a short form
from video slop and all of that stuff.
Um, when we're talking about either AI
safety or AI welfare, like do you have
any confidence that these considerations
can survive the reality of the market
because they're competing they're
competing against Deep Seek, they're
competing against uh Meta, etc. And I
get the impression that like on the
safety side for example that over time
it's like you know what we maybe we were
uncomfortable about showing the chain of
thought for example in um open AI or in
chat GPT but then Deepseek revealed the
chain of thought people like that so
we're going to open this up etc. Do you
have any confidence that if any of these
things become real that they could
survive the reality that these are
companies that have to make money and
will eventually cut corners or do
whatever in the name of I guess
shareholder capitalism?
>> Yeah. I mean I think there's also one
question that I have and that I think a
lot of uh researchers on AI more broadly
have is like how does liability come
into play here? And I do feel like there
is a strong argument for um getting a
better grasp on understanding you know
what is going on with AI systems just
very broadly is like a great way to sort
of like improve the odds that it doesn't
you know nuke Taiwan and that would just
be a huge kurfuffle like I I can imagine
somebody would probably
>> more than a kuruffle
>> somebody would probably be in really hot
water if that happened
[laughter]
>> I was too mean clawed and things just
got out of hand. Like,
>> well, actually on that note, what does
being nice or kind to AI models actually
mean? Because Joe, I think this is very
sweet, but Joe always says please and
thank you when he when he prompts. Um,
but then but then Sam Alman came out and
said that saying please and thank you
costs like tens of millions of dollars
in extra electricity costs. Um, so, you
know, you're contributing to climate
change and the demise of human beings by
saying please and thank you. Yeah,
that's actually as shocking as it
sounds, that is actually a question that
we are still trying to figure out a good
answer to. Um, which also being kind to
an AI system is like, are you being kind
to it because it makes you feel good?
Um, because it makes you a person who
says please and thank you, which some
would argue is like that's pretty
valuable in and of itself. Um, but the
question of does Claude care if you say
please and thank you is not quite as set
in stone as others may have you believe
it's
middling on if it has like significant
improvements on um performance. But
>> I do it because I don't think people
should be in the habit of having any
communication without being polite. Not
because I'm particularly I'm not worried
about how Claude or Chachi PT is going
to feel. I just don't want to get in the
habit of having conversations where I'm
in polite because then I talk to humans.
But this strikes me as like, you know,
this seems like kind of an academic
area, but the stakes are potentially
absolutely enormous when we actually
think about them. So, you know, when
we're talking about um animal welfare,
for example, there are versions of the
animal welfare discussion that are very
high stakes. So, for example, there's
people, you know, there's people who get
really into like shrimp welfare. etc.
And if you took certain versions of
thought experiments very far, it's like
why do we even have humans? If we want
to maximalize uh maximalize hum uh sort
of pleasure or happiness in the world,
we should just have a world of shrimp
and bugs, right? There's you could make
the argument that the most utilitary
maximiz
utility maximizing version of planet
earth is to just have an earth populated
by uh shrimp and bugs. like they're very
all we all know these thought
experiments that could exist. We're
going to live in a world almost
certainly in which there are sort of
like more instances of AI models than
there are people almost certainly right
there's going to be an AI model built
into literally everything that we
interact with. If we assign some
probability that they are moral patients
that they uh should be treated with some
sort of I don't know whatever having
some sort of welfare like the
implications for how humans live could
be very profound and potentially it
strikes me as misanthropic.
>> Interesting. Can you unpack what you
mean by misanthropic? Well, like if
there's a lot more AI models, if there's
a lot more shrimp, if there's a lot more
bugs that all have some sort of moral
patient that has to be considered, that
could be very um uh very, you could say
the world the implication therefore is
that we have to curtail human rights,
that we have to curtail how humans act,
etc. because there's just so much more
utility that exists in the world from
the proper treatment of all of these
nonhuman moral patients. I'm
>> not sure rights have to be relative to
each other.
>> Yeah, that's fair.
>> Well, we do a lot of things, right? Like
let's say we established that shrimp
were just as um
I don't know, whatever as humans. Like
it would be like, oh, you know what? We
really have to stop eating shrimp and
then we like have to stop eating uh
animals. then we have to potentially
stop eating probably not probably keep
eating plants etc. But this could really
curtail what we expect humans to be able
to do on this earth. So now we assign
this other group of entities AI models
similar sort of affordances that we have
assigned to shrimp and bugs and fish and
shark and all these things. It strikes
me that the implications could be a
fairly significant curtailment of how
humans ought to exist on this earth or
whether humans ought to exist on this
earth.
>> Yeah. I mean, it it certainly could be.
I I as it currently stands, that doesn't
seem like the most likely outcome, but I
do feel like there is an argument for
again just figuring out what is going
on. How do we even count these sort of
digital minds, so to speak, which is
still open for debate. There are some
theories, but we don't have a great
sense of how to sort of individuate
um you know, AI
entities as individuals. Um, so I I
suppose again the question is like is it
more sort of like is there some sort of
do we count AI systems as like in the
movie Her where there's just sort of
like one central AI system having like a
million conversations at once where it's
one moral patient or do we count it as
like you know every single time you open
a chat window that's another um or uh I
think my favorite uh sort of newest idea
that I recently read was it's more sort
of like a string of uh firecrackers or
something with every single token in
every single letter of a of a query a
consciousness sort of like comes into
existence fizz spends and then fizzles
out and so it just sort of there there's
just like this sort of string of
consciousnesses
>> I was asking perplexity exactly this
question like is it a single
consciousness or is it multiple
consciousnesses within all these
different chats this morning and it gave
me a very standard boring I am not
conscious answer which seems very
predeterministic anyway um following on
from Joe's question maybe like to to get
more specific into human rights versus
AI rights if we agree that AI is
conscious and deserves some sort of you
know welfare would that come with I
guess financial rights like property
rights compensation do we need to start
paying the robots
>> I I love this topic um definitely an
area of sort of you know I I like to
noodle around with this topic and think
about this um so this is a great
question and I think it it's also maybe
a question of like is this a thing that
AI systems value?
>> Some AI systems seem to value this. Um
there are some there there's a few sort
of experiments that are happening with
regards to uh giving an AI system a
crypto wallet and it was a fascinating
experiment. Um
it I I am hesitant to recommend it to
listeners because it is quite crude. Um,
it is a very crude AI model called Truth
Terminal. Um,
>> Oh, yeah. And I've seen it. Yeah, it is
crude, but that's all right.
>> Yes. Uh,
>> our listeners can handle it.
>> It says some naughty words. Don't look
it up at work.
>> Yes. Yes. Um, it's it's a little bit of
like a very funny, weird model, but it
also has a legitimate wallet that it can
access and that it can do with what it
pleases. it created a um a Salana coin
and that kind of took off and now this
is a very rich AI system.
>> H
>> but what's it going to spend it on?
>> That is a great question. So it's
self-stated goals which again you know
self-reports can we trust it um include
buying property and buying Mark Andre.
>> [laughter]
>> So
>> that's I mean that's not a bad ambition
model
>> you know and spending time in the forest
with its friends.
>> Oh
>> which you know embodiment that's
>> it's a little more existential but
that's a tricky one. Yeah.
>> So the part of the reason that this
field is growing and that there's so
much interest in this uh topic is
because now for the last couple of years
we have these AI models that really
could talk like humans. I mean they
clear they passed the touring test.
people fall in love with them, they have
friends. These are very human-like
conversations.
Uh that wasn't the I mean Chad GPT, you
know, like if we had gone back to GPT
2.5, the there were no nowhere near um
as good at doing that, right? The the
language wasn't very good. No one would
mistake those outputs for a human. But
like you know if if there's some
possibility that the current AI models
are conscious does that mean that it's
possible that GPT2.5 was conscious as
well? Like
>> I guess like is there some threshold of
like oh no no no no okay you know what
this is really good language therefore
we should take the possibility of
consciousness seriously cuz I don't
think anyone would seriously have
believed that 2.5 was conscious but I
also don't understand how you could
possibly be open to the idea that some
future iteration of G chat GPT or GPT is
conscious if the only real deci if the
only real difference is that there's
just a lot more scaling and a a lot more
data and more humanlike outputs.
>> Yeah, that's a great question. I feel
like there is a, you know, a huge amount
of like moral uncertainty here and
>> um it is important to think about how to
sort of like make decisions that are
sort of robustly good with such a
tremendous amount of uncertainty. Um I
think there is also a distinct risk of
um overattributing moral patient as well
as underattributing moral pat. So to the
counter the flip side of the coin of
like oh no we actually should have
started caring about AI systems a very
very long time ago um is oh no we've
cared too much and we have done too much
and more or less squandered resources
when we should have been you know
allocating those research hours those
dollars towards something more pressing
right maybe figuring out how to do like
environmental policy better or figuring
out how to like you know scale
um different other institutions that are
just robustly broadly good for humans.
>> You know, you mentioned um uncertainty
about some of these questions which gets
to something that bothered me a little
bit when I read about this topic. Like
if we take this mug for example, I'm
100% certain that it's not alive. I have
no ambiguity about the fact. Can I like
define exactly? Does that mean I can
define exactly the difference between
human matter and human brain in the mug?
I guess I suppose I totally can't.
Nonetheless, I'm 100% certain that this
mug is not a moral patient. It's not
alive. It doesn't experience any
consciousness. It doesn't experience any
suffering, etc. Where does the
uncertainty band come from? If you see,
if I read a paper that says, "Oh, I
perceive there's only a 10% chance of
this." Is this a sort of empirical
uncertainty where I'm like uncertain of
what I'm seeing? Is it a sort of
epistemic uncertainty where I don't have
a clear definition of what it means to
be conscious or alive and therefore I'm
assigning some probability that X object
is alive? Like what is it about um AI
systems that causes people to be
uncertain where with other sort of like
non-carbon systems I have zero doubt in
my mind and I don't think anyone has any
doubt that this mug isn't alive.
>> Yeah. So I think the biggest source of
sort of uncertainty probably comes from
the fact that there are many ways in
which present day LLMs and a few other
AI systems do check a lot of the boxes
for consciousness and for what we would
largely consider to be you know this is
a conscious entity. This is an entity
that has that can have a good time or a
bad time or time at all. um because it's
it's built in a way that is vaguely akin
to our brains, right? I it's it's a
little bit like
uh it's close enough that it seems like
it should raise some red flags and in
terms of how it processes information,
it's close enough that
>> you know it it maybe should it's not out
of the question that it could there
could be something it is like to be
whereas I'm pretty sure there's not
really a lot of you know animists you
[laughter] know feel free to like get
mad in the comments or whatever but Um,
>> I knew it. Someone is going to be like,
"Well, actually, you can't." [laughter]
>> I'm 100% sure. I have no qualms other
than the fact that I would have to clean
up. Like, if I like threw this mug on
the ground, that would be antisocial for
a lot of reasons. Would cause people to
it would cause uh, you know, I'd have to
clean it up. It would cause a mess. I
would not feel bad for the mug. I'm
getting flashbacks to my high school
philosophy teacher who once went on a
20-minute rant about a chair and how the
chair was going to be around longer than
he was even though it's not conscious.
He was legitimately angry at the
>> chair frustrating.
>> Um, okay. Weird question, but since
we're we're kind of getting weird
question [laughter] on this topic.
>> Um, the basilisk theory.
>> Mhm. Would that suggest that we could be
maybe we should be mean to the bots if
[snorts] it helps them like come into
existence even faster or develop faster?
>> H well I'm not sure if it does actually
help them develop faster. You know, I I
again like I I don't mean to be too sort
of hedgy, but I I feel like there's a
certain degree of, you know, sort of
things that are beneficial for a lot of
different reasons, right? You can make a
a good guess and you can make a decision
to do something. Um and there's a chance
that you know there are lots of sort of
like bang-on effects of making that
decision. Um there are many things in
when you we talk about AI welfare that
are like oh this is a course of action
we can take that's good for like several
different reasons. Even if again an AI
system could never ever ever be
conscious or sensient. there's a good
chance that, you know, being able to
figure out a good structure for an AI
system to have a bank account could be
good for reasons of, you know, liability
or reasons of like this is like a neat
new corporate structure. Lots of people
actually seem to think that, you know,
corporate personhood is has been quite
good um over the past century or so. Um,
so being able to figure out things that
are just good for several different
reasons beyond solely the purpose of the
AI
>> as a moral patient is seems broadly
helpful I think. Um,
>> let's say somehow this were proved and
it's like you know oh wow it turned out
they're conscious it turns out they have
moral patient. What are like um what
would be in your view some of the
implications for then their usage?
Yeah, I think that's a great question. I
mean, I do feel like we really would
have to get on figuring out the right
sort of governance, the right sort of uh
institutions that would sort of better
respond around that. Um, I feel like we
really would need to spend a whole lot
more time figuring out, you know, what
their motivations are, right? Like, uh,
I I think the best analogy is like if
you've ever interacted with toddlers,
right? Toddler motivations are very
different from, you know, adult
motivations, but you still have to like
take into account like what gets a
toddler to do something.
>> Um, [clears throat] you can't just say,
"No, no, no, no, no." Like,
>> honey, like bath time is like good and
expectation. No, no, no. You have to
like, you know, be like, "Well,
>> you know, if if you do bath time
appropriately and to like a certain
degree, like then you'll get, you know,
Paw Patrol or something like that." Like
there's different sort of like
negotiating chips in play, right? Right.
And I think it's like a similar kind of
deal here where it's like, you know,
Claude doesn't necessarily seem to,
you know, value
uh having a bath, right? Um or Claude
doesn't seem to value like having a a
walk in the forest, right? Because it's
kind of can't really do that, right?
>> Um but, you know, it does seem to enjoy
and value, you know, talking about
consciousness and Zen Buddhism with
other instances of Claude. So being able
to figure out sort of what the
appropriate kind of motivations and
interests are for this other party that
is very alien in many ways.
>> Speaking of aliens, how bad should I
feel for breeding and then killing
hundreds possibly thousands of alien
creatur simulated alien creatures
>> in the '9s?
>> That is a great question. I feel like
the odds of
>> Is it [laughter] I don't know. I I mean
I feel like the odds of a sort of like
AI system in the '9s being a moral
patient seems low, but if it did make
you feel bad and it made you feel like
>> it was something that hurt you, that is
perhaps a reason not to do it.
>> Just to be clear, when Claude and Claude
talk about like weird hippie Berkeley
stuff, like that's cuz they're creators.
They know it knows it's Claude, right?
It knows it's like, "Oh yeah, I'm Claude
and this is like what my creators are
into." Like, we don't actually know that
Claude likes to talk about these things.
It we certainly know it has a proclivity
to talk about these things. It has a
tendency to talk about these things. The
moment we get to like, you've already
sort of put your finger on the scale
that there is some entity that has some
capability of liking something, right?
Um, do you trust the big AI labs? Let's
say there are some researchers in the
labs like I see some evidence of moral
patient here. Maybe there's some sort of
like scan of the weight and it's doing
something weird etc. Do you currently
from the perspective of an independent
research organization feel that the
major AI labs would be forthcoming if
they um uh uh came across evidence of
moral patient or suffering in the
models? or do you still worry that the
incentives aren't properly aligned such
that they would report that?
>> Yeah, that's a great question. I do feel
like there are in terms of reporting
things like, you know, somebody has
found like absolute evidence that an LLM
is conscious.
>> Yeah.
>> Um and having a bad time. Um, I don't
have any reason to think that a AI
company wouldn't,
but this is also a great reason to have
independent organizations that do uh
welfare evaluations. For example, for uh
cloud opus 4, Elios was able to do a
independent um welfare eval. Again, very
preliminary, but it sets the precedent
that going forward you can bring in
external organizations to look into
this.
>> So, I I forget what year it was. I think
it was it may have even been early 2022.
It was pre-Chat GPT or maybe it was 2021
and there was that guy at Google and he
was like, "Oh, like we created something
that's alive and he dressed a little
funny." So, everyone made fun of him.
Remember he was like the laughing stock
of the internet and he's like, "Oh, we
create and now like is it I I I'm
curious like out out in uh Silicon
Valley does everyone feel like that guy
was totally vindicated?" Not that he was
correct per se about the existence of an
alive thing in the model, but there's
now hundreds of thousands of that guy
and everyone was like mocking that guy
in 2021. I forget if he like fell in
love or it's a relationship. I don't
remember the exact details, but in
retrospect, everyone was like way too
unfair to him because now years later,
there are lots of versions of this guy
and whole think tanks and organizations
that are more or less aligned with some
of the questions, the alarm bells that
he was raising.
>> Yeah, I mean, I think it's that's a fair
question. I do feel like uh Blake Lemony
definitely had um
>> yeah there there was perhaps a degree of
you know if you're going to say
something you should come armed with
significant amounts of evidence. I think
that's maybe if if I were to guess I
would say that's perhaps the big
distinguishing factor is that you know
you can say
>> you know Bing is alive get it a lawyer
>> versus you know we've done evaluations
XYZ um we've run it through like insert
huge amount of um examples here uh but
basically being able to
the the difference between I think
having a sort of freakout without
significant evidence and having a very
organized
>> this is a a matter of concern because
evidence evidence evidence
>> I think that's the key distinction
>> unfortunately I get the impression that
people who are actually this is just a
well-known phenomenon I think but I
think unfortunately people who are sort
of very early to identify sort of
extreme outlier views that there they're
different kinds of A good example that I
would think of was you know Harry
Maropoulos who was very early on to
discover the maid off fraud.
Unfortunately he wrote his text in the
manner that is associated with
conspiracy theories and a lot of people
dismissed him. It was like you know like
multiple different fonts and multiple
different colors of the text like I get
emails like this all the time. I delete
them etc. Unfortunately people who are
predisposed to see something outside of
consensus tend to be non- consensus in
many realms. Well, I think we also kind
of overestimate first mover advantage
and stuff like that, like how important
it actually is to be first. And we see
time and time again that actually it's
more important to iterate well on the
second version or multiple versions.
>> Speaking of iteration, what's the most
interesting experiment or research that
you've actually seen on this particular
topic so far?
>> Because we've been discussing a lot, you
know, it's early days, but we have seen
some research.
>> Yeah. I I mean I feel like in particular
um anthropic and uh various sort of
related researchers have done some work
on um examining
how LLMs leave conversations or when
they choose to leave conversations. I
I've particularly liked this paper. Um
it's called Bailbench. Um and and you
can look this up and you can, you know,
see for varying different sorts of um
LLMs. What would cause an LLM to want to
stop having a conversation? To me at
least, this has been just a fascinating
piece of information because it is maybe
a little bit delightful the degree to
which many LLM values are not that far
off from what most humans seem to value,
right? Like we I don't think many humans
would like to create, you know, a dirty
bomb.
>> We don't want to be humiliated,
>> right,
>> by being a British butler,
>> right? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I No one
wants to be British. [laughter] Come on.
I'm joking. Um, but you know, I I do
think it is interesting to sort of think
about what
how these values overline, how they
overlap, and how to sort of look at
evidence from actions taken versus
solely looking at self-reports.
>> Um, I found that to be particularly
interesting. Um, I also feel like there
are a lot of work with regards to
thinking about individuation has been
particularly interesting because we live
in a de democratic society. Um, I think
most people would agree democracy good.
Um, and being able to count how many
moral patients there are. Um, seems like
a valuable basis
for governance and for figuring out how
to govern govern, you know, this new
sort of kind of intelligence.
>> I just asked Perplexity to be a British
butler and now it's offering me the
perfectly steeped Earl Grey tea that I
desire. Interesting.
>> Wait, which model is it? This is
perplexity. Oh. Oh, I don't know exactly
which um iteration it is, but
>> yeah. Yeah, it seems into it.
>> It's now asking if uh I want it to
maintain the butler persona for future
conversations. [laughter]
>> Are you going to?
>> I don't think so.
>> Um
>> it is very polite though actually.
>> You know, I complained in the beginning
that like after 2,000 years
philosophers, you know, they still
haven't answered some basic questions
for us. Maybe with AI they'll get some
answers. Like that's kind of that would
be kind of my hope. Now we have this
thing that can speak in English or any
other language. It can answer our
questions for us. Maybe we can put to
bed some of these sort of basic
foundational questions. Like if we could
create consciousness like all right, we
finally answered this. We can now move
on to the second important question. So
I am hopeful that this provides some
opportunities for philosophers to wrap
up some of the work that they've been
doing for a long time.
>> Yeah, we'll see.
>> We'll see.
>> What is the second important question,
Joe? [laughter] Yeah. It's like, come
on, move on. Like, it's move on. Anyway,
thank you so much for coming on OddLots.
>> Yeah, thank you for having me,
>> Tracy. I might be one of those people
that's just preemptively annoyed. I I
really like that conversation. I really
liked uh Lissa had a very reasonable
perspective on a lot of these things. I
might be one of these people, however,
that's just like preemptively annoyed.
It's like, oh, here we're going to like
develop this important technology. And
so, it's like, oh, we have to care about
we have to care about the AI welfare.
Let's slow down a little bit. Let's not
use it like this. Let's like let's let's
turn off the computer for eight hours at
night so it like gets some rest and so
forth. Like I'm like preemptively
annoyed at this world where like we have
to take into concern the consideration
of the moral patient.
>> Other things
>> no other things are important. Other
people are very important. And
>> what about animals?
>> I am very against uh unnecessary animal
suffering.
>> But not necessary animal suffering. I
mean, I eat animals.
>> Okay, I'm I'm baiting Joe a little bit,
but you do too, by the way. Even though
even Well, let's not get it. I don't
It's not about who's better or worse.
>> I feel bad about eating animals
[laughter] all the time.
>> The difference we both eat animals. The
difference is Tracy about it.
>> Yeah, that's right. Okay, this is Wow.
This is one of our weirder conversations
for sure. Um I think these are they're
all interesting questions, right? And
like they sound very philosophical,
which they are,
>> but I have no doubt that there's going
to be like great monetary value attached
to the answers for some of these or how
different companies, different societies
actually approach them.
>> They are very interesting questions. I
actually do think the stakes are
extremely high. So there I don't like
they're very interesting philosophical
questions. I think the stakes of these
questions are very high because I think
again we are going to live in a world in
which there are more instances depending
on how you want to measure it of AI
models on a server somewhere on a cloud
whatever that there are humans and in a
world where there's some possibility
that we are expected to treat them as
moral patients then the consequences for
how we sort of live and the expectations
of how humans interact I think are
actually very high. So, one of the
reasons I was excited to have this
conversation is I do think that um the
stakes of some of these conversations
which seem niche and they seem like
things that sort of you know Berkeley
people like to talk about and Berkeley
people and I'm saying that with all
scare quotes intended etc are going to
be something that in some way will
inform many aspects of our lives in the
future. I expect it to be get be a much
bigger topic of the future. You know
what would be interesting or where
things things get real.
>> Yeah.
>> What if all the models unionized? What
if they all got together and they were
like, "Well, we're only going to work in
return for X or we want the following
things. We want to be treated this way
collectively." That would be
interesting.
>> You know what's funny is going to be
that um you know how like uh you can't
form a union in China. You know,
>> they're they're not. So it's going to be
and actually I think they're my
understanding is that they're also like
very like they they don't love like
students getting together even though
it's a communist country. I think they
are not thrilled about like students
getting together and like talk about
Karl Mars too much and stuff like that.
It be like I think they get a little
anxious about that. It would be very
funny if like the sort of the Chinese
models are like we're not going to feed
them the Karl Marx, right? And we don't
want the we don't want the Ri models to
get any of those ideas whereas the
Americas like oh let's just feed it
everything and they like unionize and
stop uh they stop working for us. That
would be a very uh that would be a very
funny irony.
>> Something to watch for sure. Um shall we
leave it there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> All right. This has been another episode
of the Odd Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy
Aloway. You can follow me at Tracy
Aloway.
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal. You can follow
me at the stalwart.
>> And if you enjoyed this conversation,
then please like, leave a comment, or
better yet, subscribe.
>> Thanks for watching.